---
layout: blogpost
title: "Keep Talking and Nobody Explodes - Physical Edition: Announcement"
category: ktane
---

A new project, now with more ambition than ever.

**A note before I start, there is not now, nor will there ever be anything 
dangerous about this project. This is not actually a bomb, just a game.**

### What is this? ###

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/blog/KTANE_logo.png" height="160px"%}

*Keep talking and Nobody Explodes* is an asynchronous multiplayer game
developed by Steel Crate Games in 2015. The game play revolves around two
roles: A single player as "The Defuser" and any number of other people as "The
Bomb Experts". As the name implies the Defuser is given a bomb that they must
defuse, the problem is that they don't know how to defuse it. Meanwhile the
Bomb Experts have a manual that tells them how to defuse any bomb. The
challenge in this game comes from the fact that the Defuser and the Bomb
Experts are separated and must communicate back and forth to both describe what
the parts of the bomb look like and how to defuse them. The bombs are designed
in such a way that the modules that make up the bomb are easy to understand but
are nearly impossible to memorize or predict leading to interesting and unique
gameplay every time.

One of the most interesting ways to play the game is in VR. Solving in VR gives
much more of an atmosphere to the game and being able to interact with the bomb
in a 3D space feels so much better as a user experience. Ever since I played it
in VR, I had a thought in the back of my mind that this would be the coolest
thing to have a physical version of. Jump cut to 2 years later, and I'm finally 
starting on the physical version of it.

This post is sort of just an announcement and status post. I will have more
about the exact start of this project and updates later. 

You can find my current progress and more details about the project up on my
[Github page](https://github.com/dlareau/KTANE-physical), and below are some 
pictures of my progress below. Most of my time so far has been dedicated to the 
underlying code libraries that will make my life easier as I go to implement 
the modules. 

I'm currently working on "Version 1", which focuses a lot on proof-of-concept
and functionality and not a lot on looks or user-proofing, those are for
version 2.

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/blog/ktane_1.jpg"
description="The case with the dividers"%}

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/blog/ktane_2.jpg"
description="First iteration of the wires module"%}

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/blog/ktane_3.jpg"
description="Internal of the wires module"%}